Shiny things are nowhere as much fun after you get them as before, even if they
have some value. So yes, that Kindle or iPad or whatever will have a real use,
and you will be marginally happier with it than without, but not as much as you
think

You can talk yourself into (or out of) anything. The only difference between
smart people and other people is that smart people do this with bigger words and
more complex arguments. Be confident, but also assume that you are broken in
ways you can never spot. Find some ways to get a checksum on life decisions
every now and then.

You don't need very much at all. Maybe a laptop computer and a couple changes of
clothes. Pictures and videos of your life. That's about it.

Nothing will ever replace experiences. No matter how big the car, nice the
house, or professional-looking the suit, it's never going to be as much fun or
mean as much later as the experiences you have in life. And it's not just having
the experience, it's looking forward to them, and planning them, and making
pictures, movies, and blogs out of them. The best part, oddly, may be the
planning. So planning a 200-dollar trip to the beach in the Fall with people you
love may give you many hours of happiness this summer -- along with the fun of
the trip itself.

Learn to keep picking topics and immersing yourself in them. Most everybody will
say to drop out and become part of the system -- 9-5 job and TV/games/internet
in the evening. If you want a life you could sleep through, that's fine. But if
you want a life you can tell stories about, keep reinventing yourself. And that
means constantly learning.

Lots of shit in life that once looked dumb or stupid opens up into this huge
panorama of beauty once you learn the rules. In so many things you are like the
guy who never saw a baseball game going to the world series. You kind of get it,
but it all seems silly. You don't know the rules. Decide to learn how to
appreciate music, for instance. Get a few college lectures on tape, get some
good music to listen to, hang out with folks who are music connoisseurs. The
more you know about various art forms, the richer your life is.

Forget philosophy and meaning-of-life shit. You're too young. For now, you are
what you do. Go do something worthwhile

Stick to a daily exercise routine at all costs

If you are changing and getting better, that means you are changing friends too.
This was very difficult for me, but you can't hang out with the same folks and
expect to become a better person. There are exceptions, of course, but to a
large degree your life is controlled by whom you choose to be friends and hang
out with. Be aware that you don't want to be the same person at 30 as you were
at 20. I'm not saying be an asshole -- keep being friendly by all means -- but
be very careful who you hold yourself up against as "normal"

Dating is a numbers game, like a lot of other things. Learn the skills of dating
and don't sweat picking up chicks (or guys)

Concentrate on your weaknesses. Make them stronger. When you get to your 30s you
can work from your strengths, but there has to be some time in your life to work
on shit you suck at, and for me it was when I had the most motivation, my 20s.

Speaking of which, you have to learn management. No matter what you do, there
will be a manager. Even if you don't want to be one, you have to understand what
the job is like to help out your manager. Being a good leader means being a good
servant. This concept sounded easy (or facile) to me in my 20s, but proved hard
to apply in practice.

You are never ready for kids. Have them early while you have energy. Read all
the books about kids if you must, but realize that creating a replacement is
about the most biologically easy thing you could do. After all, evolution has
been working on making you a great gene transferral and primate-raising machine,
so don't get paranoid and neurotic about all the latest parenting fashion. Use
some sense.

Everybody wants to be a rock star and win the lottery. Nobody ever does, and the
ones that do end up destroying their life. Realize slow success is a million
times better than overnight success.

Much of the stuff in life that normal people do is geared around killing time by
distracting you with shiny things of no value. You may never be able to fight
this completely, but you should at least deeply understand it and how it affects
your goals

Create. With a passion. There are two major kinds of people in this world,
consumers and creators. The herd will push you to consume, life will push you to
consume, consumption is the easy and default path, but true joy and a full life
come from creating. It does not matter one bit how many people like what you
create, just create. Write. Blog. Make videos. Make a movie. Write a program.
The longer the format and the more creativity involved, the more you are going
to turn on and exercise key parts of your brain. Nobody wants to be 80 and only
have stories of being at the office, but fuck, if you were at the office
creating something at least you tried to make a difference. I'd rather be that
guy than the one who watched Sumo wrestling everyday (or played 20,000 hours of
WoW during his 20s) The only thing you're going to have at the end of your life
are the decisions you made, the things you created, and memories. Learn to
maximize these things.

